January 8, 2001.
Can I believe it?
Testing 1, 2, 3.
This is Monday, January 8, 2001, and I have the honor of being in the Claydesta Center and talk with
Mr. Clayton Williams, Jr., about his Texas A&M recollections.
First, sir, introduce yourself to a stranger that might listen to this, or where did you grow up and your family background?
Well, I could almost say that my journey to A&M began when my father left Fort Stockton on a stagecoach going to Monahan's
in about 1910 or 1911 to catch the train, and he rode the train from Monahan's to Dallas to College Station.
And to this day and time when we go on the road from Monahan's to Fort Stockton, you'll see the stage layover, it was called the Ink Ranch, where my dad obviously stopped and they changed horses on the way to Monahan's.
And that's how, when I gave my talk at the dedication to building, that was, you know, I said, well, how did you come to be an Aggie?
Well, I was an Aggie number one because my father was in the class of 1915.
And there was a football player by the name of Dorbant Barton who went to A&M, who was my idol.
And I followed him playing football, but he was a great player and I was not.
And so that was another reason.
And then the third reason was that I was basically interested in agriculture.
And A&M then and now, you know, such a fine school of agriculture.
So that's how I came basically through my father.
How often had you visited before you went to enroll?
How many times did you?
One time.
What was your impression of the place?
Well, you know, it was like so many young students.
There were some Fort Stockton boys that were there, and they were juniors and seniors, and they said, it's wonderful, and you should come.
And, of course, for the first freshman year, I really thought there was a bunch of lying SOBs because the first year was pretty tough.
But, yeah, that was further influence, but it still went back to...
my father and that athlete.
And you mentioned your grandfather.
My grandfather was a, actually my grandfather was a, is and was a historian.
He was a young man before, he was born in the mid-1850s, and he actually heard the Lincoln-Douglas debates.
He lived in Carthage, Illinois as a young boy.
He was sent to Harvard to school.
At Harvard he got a law degree, which I'm not particularly proud of that, but he did get an engineering degree so that when he came to Dallas in about 1875,
He came as a lawyer looking for work, and Texas was a great place then because there was no work for lawyers.
But there was work for engineers and surveyors.
So he then made his living as a surveyor surveying the state plains of West Texas.
And in fact, he surveyed the town site in which Lubbock is located.
Lubbock is located in Block O, which is O for his initials, Oscar.
So I had in my background
Education was particularly important, and nearly all of O.W.
Williams' five children, in fact, all of them got a degree, and this is in the 1910, 1920s, you know, where not too many people were able to pursue education.
My grandfather then, after he did the surveying, he went to Silver City, New Mexico, to get rich in the mining.
He didn't get rich in mining, but he made a living as assistant postmaster
Because this was like in 1878, 79, silver gold boom.
And he was the only one in town that could read and write.
So they had to have somebody, obviously, in the mail.
So he made his living there and did prospecting otherwise.
And that was the last days of Geronimo when he was out in that part of the country.
And also Billy the Kid.
My memory is that some days, some people thought because my grandfather then came to Fort Stockton in 1883 from Silver City, New Mexico, that he was Billy the Kid.
But he was not, of course, but there were that type of rumors in those days.
So he was certainly a pioneer.
He was a crack shot with a pistol.
He did early surveying.
He came to Fort Stockton, got a job as deputy surveyor for Pecos County, which was a larger county then than it is today.
In his later years, though, he mostly made a living as a lawyer and representing landowners that lived out of state and so forth.
And that is, they had a book published, Pioneer Surveyor Frontier, Lawyer, which we've looked at here today, was published by Texas Western.
When you were getting ready to go to A&M to enroll, how did you get there on that trip?
That trip, my mother and daddy took me by automobile.
And probably, I'm not sure that I had the grades to qualify, but in that day, the little school, Fort Stockton High School, I think I was short one math course, and they just filled it out and said, go on to A&M and try your luck.
Different type of world, and I never embarrassed them.
And what, as you remember, what kind of stuff did you take with you?
What gear?
Well, you didn't take much gear because they furnished the uniform
He said, you're not going to be needing any clothes to speak of.
The military furnished all our uniforms, which was very helpful because it saved money.
And I do remember my freshman year, I spent $800 total.
I was kind of proud of that.
Now, this was the fall of 19... Fall of 1950.
Fall and spring of 51 then.
All right.
You arrived.
Where were you greeted, and how did you get into a unit?
Well, I wasn't greeted at all.
My mother and dad let me out at the dorm, which was the band dorm.
I was in the band the first year, and that's across from the movie, which is now the Shadow Canyon.
I forget the name of the dorm.
It was dorm four, I believe then.
I kind of walked in all by myself, and it was pretty sad and pretty lonesome, and there wasn't anybody there to greet you, of course.
And I really didn't care for the military, but it did me a lot of good as I look back.
All right.
Someone then assigned you to a room.
I was assigned to a room before I arrived.
So I got out, went.
My mother and dad left, and I walked up to the room, and it was 403.
Well, I don't remember what it was, fourth floor.
And started meeting people.
But there wasn't any particular greeting that I recall.
As the upperclassmen got into it, the greeting was less than what I had hoped.
They weren't really impressed with me.
Describe the process of being, other places would call it oriented, describe the process of becoming a part of the core and all of the rituals and routines.
It was that many years ago.
That was 50 years ago.
They had a good orientation for freshmen.
I recall that they said only one in four of you will be here when you graduate, and that was shocking, and that's where it turned out.
They had a good orientation, and I felt very comfortable with how they lined me out in school at the time.
Of course, you know, you were very quickly involved into the unit, which was the freshman band for the first year.
And very quickly, I was on the bullring, like most outstanding young age should be.
But I had no fault with them not giving me enough information.
And my problem was coming from a small school and hitting courses like chemistry, which I'd never had chemistry, and so on.
I had a devil of a time.
And one of the great events in my life is that I went to the different people in my floor.
One guy was named Mahaney was studying chemistry.
They helped me, helped me, helped me.
And I finally said, nobody can help me.
I've got to go do it myself.
I'll never forget it.
I went back to my room and said, I'm going to learn this.
And I did.
And that developed an attitude that you just focus in and try and work, and you'll work through it.
And that one event was very important in my life.
As you were beginning that freshman year, what was your intended future professional goal?
I intended to become, intended to go back to Fort Stockton, run my dad's ranch and farm.
One of the great things happened while I was in the Army after graduating, me and him, my dad sold the ranch, leased the farm, I was out of work.
So I started selling life insurance and eventually drifted into the oil patch.
and it's a dang good thing because going back to agriculture is a pretty tough way to make a living.
So it was very fortunate.
I'm sure my dad had some of that in mind.
He knew I probably had a better future than to be a cowboy.
Oh, I still like to be a cowboy.
So agriculture was your... Animal husbandry, animal science now was my major.
Were there any important courses that you took that first year as you look back?
Surviving chemistry.
Freshman chemistry was a very important course because I learned I could overcome.
Was there a teacher that helped?
It was a big lecture, you know, three or four hundred students in the lecture.
I do remember some very outstanding teachers, but I don't remember the teacher that lectured freshman chemistry.
I remember it was tough and I did fight it then.
I thought it was going to be my undoing, but I made it.
What about some of the other courses?
Were they...
All the freshman courses were tough because I had not learned to study.
And that's what the Corps did for me.
You had to be at your desk at 7.20 and stay there until 11.20.
Well, I generally stayed until 12.30 or 1.00.
And the learning to study was the first very big step for me at A&M.
And I don't know if I'd been in another school if I'd have done near as well as A&M because of the regularity of the hours, you know, and I developed that regularity.
I study, and then on the weekends I play, and I've done that pretty much ever since that they formed that in me.
All right, what some other people would call hazing.
describe some of the rituals you went through as a freshman in the Corps.
We were the first freshman back on campus after the freshman had been out at the adjunct, the former Bryan Air Base.
I think they probably protected us more at first than they did some later.
The verbal hazing, being a kid that was free and riding horseback and driving a tractor and I ran
I was actually a businessman before I went to A&M.
I resented the verbal hazing.
The physical hazing, we weren't mistreated there, but very little.
I think maybe it was more later, but I only got the board one time.
The hazing wasn't bad.
The verbal mistreatment, I resented it, but I was used to doing things myself.
It was part of the development, and as time went by I understood the need for it.
But I was a little different than many.
I went to A&M with a purpose.
I'd run my dad's ranch, I'd run the farm, and I was trying to solve problems.
There were problems with labor, there were problems with
with the market, there were problems.
And so I went, I had dead aim.
I took dead aim in education.
I went there to learn.
And anything that was interfering with my learning, well, I considered it my enemy.
And like, I didn't stay in the band because I didn't want to waste the time marching.
So I was less than a great core band A&M, but I made very good grades.
But you stayed in the band that first year?
I stayed in the band the first year.
What were you playing?
Played the trumpet.
and I enjoyed the marching, enjoyed the band trips, but I couldn't do, what I wanted to do was learn.
And I couldn't stay in the band and study as much as I thought I needed to.
And I stayed that way through school.
Describe the typical schedule of routine on a weekday for a freshman in the band.
What time did you get up and do what and so forth?
As best I can remember, we got up at 6.30, something like that.
You'd go shower, get dressed, march to breakfast, come back, and then you'd fall out marching formation to breakfast at Spisa Hall.
And then we were pretty well through the day until we'd get back.
And that day, we all had 18 hours.
That was a normal course.
And we went to class a big part of the day with 18 hours.
We had also lab courses.
Chemistry was lab.
Animal science had a good many lab courses.
It took a few extra hours.
Then you get back at 4.30 or 5, whatever.
The time varied some, but then you'd practice marching for a couple of hours.
And then after marching, then you'd follow them, march to Chow, come back, then study.
You were fully occupied, which was great.
I know it should have been.
So during the week, there was virtually no free time for a freshman.
You know, that didn't change a heck of a lot until my senior year.
You know, you were fully occupied, and that's what you went there to do.
You went to study and to work and to learn.
If you were trying to escape from that routine just to relax during the day, was there a place where you could?
Not really.
You know, that was the first year, I think, that they had completed Memorial Student Center.
By the time you'd get to your classes, the campus was scattered out.
There wasn't time, as I recall, for virtually any
of free time, maybe an hour every other day, but I don't think you had an hour a day of free time, as I would call it.
You were pretty well occupied.
And was your fish old lady a special friend?
Did he become?
He did not.
He left after the freshman year and joined the Air Force, and I never heard from him again.
But then my second year became, you know, like most Aggies, your first or second year was a very, very, very dear friend.
Where did you?
Got out of the band.
I got out of the band.
I went into the Air Force.
Squadron 7.
Did it have a nickname?
I don't think it did.
Squadron 7, and they changed it to F Squadron.
It was F Squadron or Squadron 7, and I forget which was first.
But that was really my outfit that I was more comfortable there.
The great friends that I developed basically were there, although there were a couple of guys in the band like Jim Eller I did business with years and years later.
But that was the outfit that I really belonged to at A&M.
When your parents left, that first time, did they give you any advice or give you any instructions just before they drove away?
No, I don't recall it.
We were both real sad because my mother and dad and my little sister, we knew it was the end of that period of my life.
It was very, very sad.
And I was very depressed.
going back up into that old lonesome dorm.
It was sad.
But it, you know, I'm sure every freshman felt the same way.
Your outfit, did you all have any routine in the dining halls?
Well, we had typical freshmen, whether it was a freshman band or any, you wore the napkin as a freshman.
I thought that was a good idea.
I'm such a sloppy eater, I'd lie, I'd wear one yet.
And, you know, you did the square meals, and you called the grub by all the names, you know, past the bull neck and the gun wadding and so forth, which was, that was all fun.
The food was always good, you know, it wasn't anything fancy, but I never left hungry, and of course you had to wait till the upperclassmen got started, and we ate last, so it always had us in a hurry, and it was a little harassment.
going on, but it was also, I didn't call it hazing as much as training.
I wasn't bothered with that part much.
In the first year or so, when you went home and described for your dad what was happening?
He laughed.
I was wondering, did he have any comparisons of what it was?
Well, his was a lot tougher than mine.
Is that right?
Yeah.
When he went to A&M, and that was 1911, his freshman year was in a tent.
They lived in tents at the time, so those stories
The stories he told me of his early days are about as vivid in my mind as my own.
Share some of those.
Yeah, well, some of those, they've got their butt beat with a saber, and that's a lot tighter than that.
It was a lot tougher.
A lot of time, he came in one time on the train, and one of the kids was, the train didn't stop right at College Station.
Dad tried to talk the guy into not jumping off.
He jumped off and was killed.
Dad had to walk around about half a mile, found the body there.
they talked about the Hazen was a lot tougher when he was there and it was physical and he had he got in a fight with one guy with a saber in the dorm and the guy came after him with a saber and he had a bucket and he hit him in the head with a bucket I mean it was pretty serious business when they're having a saber fight they of course it was smaller school I don't know what it was then partway through his schooling then he didn't graduate from A&M that time he left
and volunteered for the service, as the guys did then more than stayed.
And then he went through first officers training in Leon Springs at San Antonio, went into the service, served in France, came back, finished his degree at A&M.
He didn't like it but, you know, a year or something like that.
But it was, his study was electrical engineering.
He played on the football team there at the time.
Of course, it was a smaller school as well.
And the court trips were fun for him as well.
I don't, you know, it wasn't 1914, 1912, 13, 14, there weren't just a lot of folks there.
Again, it was, I remember him saying it was
It was not expensive.
You know, he could get an education where some other place he might not be able to afford it like that.
Did you have the impression from him and his classmates there was the same great pride, that they felt the same great pride that you and your... I think not.
I think it grew more with time.
Oh, okay.
I don't think he had the pride because...
In 1911, really, they hadn't been much of a school for very long.
So many of the traditions were developed after that.
And like the NM, the men that served in World War I, later World War II, they were all building
These traditions, as you mentioned, Earl Rudder, you know.
So, no, they didn't have it.
They didn't have that feeling.
It was developing, but not like when I was there.
Was he by chance in the band?
No, he was not in the band.
I was going to ask for a comparison.
Well, I didn't intend to be in the band.
I just played in the band.
Fort Stockton, you played in the band and played football.
You did everything.
The band was secondary to me to athletics for them.
I liked athletics better.
That first year, how did you and your parents communicate back and forth?
Letters.
They wrote my grandmother, my mother, and particularly my dad.
I got four or five letters a week, and I looked forward to those letters.
That was the day you didn't use a telephone.
We didn't have telephones in the dorm.
If you wanted a phone, you went to the
YMCA was the only phone.
So going to the post office to get your letters was a highlight of the day.
And, you know, that's the kind of thing that we missed because there's a written record of all those letters, which with my kids, mostly we phoned, talked back and forth on the phone.
And no air conditioning in these, as a matter of fact.
It was a hot sun with gun there.
And you didn't have any wheels.
I had wheels my second year.
I had a bicycle first year in the,
Hart Hall was an athletic dorm.
They always stole my bicycle to end up at Hart Hall.
But the wheels came out.
I hitchhiked back in Fort Stockton, which was a long way from being in Fort Stockton.
Describe hitchhiking.
Hitchhiking was something that was pretty neat.
It was almost a badge of honor to hitchhike.
And in that period of time, people would pick up Aggies.
They tended to pick us up.
And so we'd brag on hitchhiking, so to speak.
It took me 36 hours to hitchhike home one time.
And I'd been a pretty successful young man in high school.
I'd made money.
I had my own cotton crops.
I'd farmed.
I had my cattle.
And so I bought a second-hand Chevrolet when I got home the next morning after 36 hours.
I thought, this is not the way to go.
Did you ever have a negative experience as an Aggie hitchhiker?
Anything bad?
The only negative thing I had, I was in Fredericksburg.
And I admitted some Fredericks to Fredericksburg.
You're there.
I'd stop, and some of the high school kids would act like they were going to pick me up, and I'd start running, and they'd drive off.
Oh, oh.
And it rode with a truck driver in Fredericksburg to Ozona.
And then, you know, finally got up.
No, I didn't.
I have not yet had anybody except say, well, the guy was driving a little too fast or he was drinking a little too much.
Yeah.
But those are the words.
Well, you know, we had these fantasies.
Some beautiful girl is going to pick us up in a hitchhiker and take us off to fantasy land.
That sure as heck never happened.
Nobody's ever heard of it.
No, that just wasn't the way that worked out.
In your first year or so, did you and your buddies try any pranks or goodwill?
Yeah, always.
Share some of that.
Always.
My sophomore year, particularly the drowned out, was a great event in those days.
And I'm not sure they'd describe it, but the door opened inward to the room.
It had a large brass handle.
And they had the F stick.
And you cut a little notch in it so you could throw the bucket of water, close the door, flap the stick, and whoever's in there could not get to.
And that's why only the seniors could lock their door.
So sophomores and juniors had to leave their doors open.
If somebody mistreated you too bad, you go drown them out.
And there wasn't much they could do about it, because there'd be two of us.
That was fun.
I loved that part.
Actually, I held a record.
I think nobody's ever drowned out 17 people, and I did one night.
One night?
One night.
That was the spring.
Finally ran out of upperclassmen, so I went over and drowned out my fish buddies for like anybody else.
But you'd get the bucket, and they'd be full of water, and there'd be two of you.
And you're scared, because if they caught you, it'd been hell to pay.
And you'd throw open the door, throw the water, slam the door.
Then you'd get in the bed and you'd hope your heart would settle back down because they'd come check your pulses.
That was fun.
That was good stuff.
Did you ever get caught?
I never got caught.
They're pretty sure I did it, but they never caught.
If anyone did get caught, what was their... Probably more bull ring or the board.
Okay.
The board was illegal, but something like that, they'd use it, and they probably should.
Do you remember any good bull pranks that resulted in someone getting hurt?
No.
I see.
I don't either.
But there have been some occasionally.
We've read of them, but no.
That, I guess, was somewhat of a delicate balance as I look back.
When you drowned somebody out, they probably earned it.
Except that night at 17, I just drowned everybody.
But they generally earned it, and it had a certain counter-discipline.
You know, somebody really started picking on somebody.
And then you could challenge to the boxing gloves, stuff like that.
That didn't happen often because
You might beat them in a boxing ring, but you'd lose again the next day, you know.
And normally the victim of the drowned out was in your outfit.
Generally.
Or if there was some other reason.
And generally it was someone who you thought wasn't just doing this right.
But sometimes it was just plum meanness that came out in us.
And the spring's when it always happens.
As you went to class,
What was the normal code of behavior for an Aggie freshman in class?
Did you go regularly?
Oh, yeah.
You didn't miss class.
School was serious to me.
The ones that did eventually dropped out.
If you didn't take it serious, you didn't make it.
So class was regular and serious, and I didn't cut classes.
Later, like in junior year, I might cut a Friday afternoon class when the grades were good and everything.
It was serious.
I think most kids looked at it that way.
What about going to sleep in class?
Maybe there was some sleeping.
I don't remember much sleeping in class.
Who did you have any person you became acquainted with that first year or so that you turned to for advice?
Who did you go to?
Like R.C.
Potts?
R.C., I had him, yeah.
Oh, really?
Yes, sir, I did.
Oh, describe him as a teacher.
Johnson Grass Potts.
And I knew him after I graduated when he was on Athletic Council.
He was a very good teacher, and he always advocated Johnson Grass as another good feed.
He was a great communicator with the kids.
He would have been somebody to go for advice.
I did not.
There was one person in the military, I can't remember his name, it was some help to me.
Mostly your advice came as you belly ached with your fish buddies.
There wasn't much great communication to an upperclassman or to a senior.
I did have some wonderful professors, though, and it'd be remiss not to cuncle
was one of the two finest professors.
Harry Kunkel.
Oh, describe him.
And he taught me physiology and pharmacology.
He was excellent.
And he was so bright, and he presented in such a way that I just loved his course.
And the other was an English teacher that taught me public speaking.
And I believe his name was Bird, and he was later on athletic.
Was there a Bird?
I think it was.
And he had a way, he'd say, Mr. Williams, just give a class a few well-chosen words.
And it was the only public speaking course I ever had.
But I took that and I did a lot of speaking over a lot of years from that one three-hour course.
And I believe it was Burden.
And he was excellent.
He was able to draw you out.
He and Kunkel were the top two.
But I had a lot of good professors.
Did you have any courses with a shy man from Orange named O.D.
Butler?
I did.
He was a good teacher.
He wasn't as good as those two, though.
He was a little tougher, a little rougher.
I had meets with him.
So that was more of a lab course.
And he was good.
But he didn't have that zip that, you know, there's an occasional teacher that just brings it out of you, brings you into his course.
And those two were the highlights.
But all my professors were good.
I just don't remember having a bad one.
Did you find the faculty, your instructors, were they available if you wanted to?
to go talk to them?
They were, but we didn't do that much.
I think there's more of that now than there was then.
We were, you take a freshman A&M or sophomore, you're pretty intimidated by everybody.
And so I didn't feel comfortable going to professor as much.
It was, probably there was more of a structure difference then than now probably.
Because my kids talk about going to professor and getting help, and I just never did that.
If I wanted help, I'd go to a classmate or somebody that was better than A&M.
But I mentioned earlier, getting help didn't work for me.
I had to dig it out myself.
Did you, that first year, ever think about dropping out of A&M?
No.
Absolutely.
Please describe that.
Oh, absolutely.
Time and again.
In fact, my first year, I was going to quit.
I didn't like the upperclassmen.
I didn't like the way they was treating me.
I didn't like the military.
I didn't like where I was.
But I wanted to get an education.
I was always quitting.
But I'd also...
I'd also heard that a lot of people quit.
I didn't like the idea of being a quitter.
And so I went home and I went to a math class and somebody stole my overcoat.
Went downstairs, went up to get this going.
I said, well, a bunch of damn thieves.
I'm going to get out of this place.
And I'm going to quit.
I called my dad and said, I'm going to quit.
And he said, OK.
He just told me.
I said, well, I'm going to come home.
I'm going to get the Thanksgiving holiday and I'm going to quit.
Come back to Thanksgiving.
I'm going to get the Christmas holiday, then I'm going to quit.
Well, I'm going to quit.
I'm going to quit at the end of the year.
I got, when I left A&M my freshman year, I got out of the car before, I guess before I called a riot, I gave A&M the finger.
I said, I've never come back this time.
Hell with it.
And I wonder, well, what so-and-so, you know, before it came back.
I spent the first year quitting.
I didn't like it at all.
And there'd be fib to say I didn't.
I really didn't care much for it until the second part of junior year.
But I also could see I was learning, and I was progressing, and I was developing that pride that I really didn't know was developing, proud of being an Aggie, proud of having to work harder.
I had some good friends at the university.
I had to study.
My brains were about like theirs, and I had to study two or three times more than they did.
I didn't know I'm learning more than they are, and I did.
And so it was evolving subconsciously.
I was becoming a dedicated agulist before I knew it.
And your dad by... He didn't tell me I had to stay.
No, he said, okay, that's what he'll do.
And that, in hindsight, that worked better probably.
Oh, yeah.
If he said, okay, quit, he said, okay, quit.
Well, I was wanting to blow some steamer, you know.
He said, all right, if you're not happy there, come on, Mickey go.